# IOT-Based-Weather-Monitoring-System
Mini Project for Sem 4

## Introduction
Recent years have seen a lot of interest in environmental monitoring and climatic change. Man wants to be aware of the most recent weather conditions in any location, such as a college campus or any other specific facility. There should be weather stations because the climate is changing so quickly. Here, we offer a weather station that is beneficial for all locations. Based on IOT, this weather station (internet of things). It has environmental sensors that can be utilised to report measurements from a particular location. The Weather Monitoring Systems in global Market is projected to grow from 20 thousand crores in 2021 to 26 thousand crores by 2026, at an annual growth of 5.1% in terms of value during the forecasted period. The motivation of this project is to create an ideal environment and keep a track of the internal and external surrounding weather of the aquaponics unit. The term "Internet of Things" (IoT) refers to networks of physical objects (things) that are equipped with sensors, software, and other technologies to connect to other devices and systems online and exchange data with them. It is a broad field that offers a place to build a variety of prototypes, from simple domestic devices to sophisticated industrial devices. The paper gives a description of using IoT to help the admin to identify and monitor the temperature, humidity, barometric pressure, air quality, light intensity and rainfall in the environment. This dashboard will update real time values of the above parameters to help monitor, control and maintain a particular environment.

### Limitations of the existing system are:
1. Existing weather monitoring systems that are used in the field generally consist of unconventional and heavy machinery.
2. Power requirements are one of many major constraints these instruments are generally cited far from the main power supply.
3. Data that is collected by the instruments needs to be manually transferred from the logger to a  laptop or computer via a cable.

### Smart Weather Monitoring System:
Alternative for this conventional weather monitoring system is Smart Weather Monitoring System which makes use of IoT. There are multiple sensors commercially available that can work in the ‘Smart Weather Monitoring and Real Time Alert system using IoT’ application. Existing IoT based systems utilize sensors such as DHT11 for temperature and humidity measurement, anemometer for wind speed measurement, LDR for light intensity monitoring, UV radiation measurement using GY8511 solar sensor, Carbon monoxide level monitoring using MQ7, soil moisture measurement using Hygrometer, ultrasonic sensor for level measurement of rain water, raindrop sensor for detecting rainfall/snowfall and Arduino microcontroller based cyber-physical interface. The combination of these components creates a robust alert system (for dealing with emergency scenarios) and data logging mechanism which ensures that the alerts are not lost over time when left unattended. Smart weather monitoring system allow a significant advantage over their conventional counterparts in terms of portability, ease of installation and monitoring, allowing complex weather evaluations/predictions, size, compactness, decreased power requirements, ease of interfacing with APIs using Raspberry Pi, creation of an app that links with the physical system and allows linking the system to a web page that logs data allowing its graphical assessment.

## MQTT Protocol
MQTT(Message Queuing Telemetry Transport Protocol) is one of the earliest M2M communication protocols with its introduction in 1999. Developed by IBM’s Andy Stanford-Clark and Arcom Control Systems Ltd (Eurotech)’s Arlen Nipper, it is a lightweight M2M publish/subscribe communication protocol that is designed for constrained network applications. It is a binary protocol with a header size of 2 bytes and maximum allowable message payload is 256 MB. The MQTT client transmits messages to a MQTT broker topic, end-users/clients that are subscribed to the topic receive these updates or they can be stored for future subscription. With a default TCP transport protocol and TLS/SSL security protocol combined with multi-topic subscription utility makes it a connection-oriented protocol. MQTT offers three QoS levels for reliable message transmission. We have chosen MQTT as our choice of IoT communication protocol because of its suitability for large networks of small devices(temperature sensor in our smart weather monitoring application)  that requires monitoring on a back-end Internet server implemented using Node Red servers.
The publish-subscribe model used in MQTT is different from the traditional client-server model. It separates the client (publisher) that sends the message from the client (subscriber) that receives the message. The publisher and the subscriber do not need to establish direct contact. We can either let multiple publishers publish messages to one subscriber, or let multiple subscribers receive messages from one publisher at the same time. The essence of it is that an intermediate role called a broker is responsible for all message routing and distribution. The traditional client-server model can achieve similar results, but it cannot be as simple and elegant as the publish subscribe model.
